Project Description: 
Name - ProteinEDU
An interactive protein-folding educational game that teaches the user the basics of primary structure amino acid interactions.

Competitive Analysis:
Inspiration for this project was taken primarily from Foldit, a similarly styled game that involves folding proteins, which actually crowdsources the "work" of determining the structure of real proteins by presenting them to the user in the form of puzzles to solve. The results can then actually be directly used by scientists to determine the correct folding conformation of these proteins, making a real world impact by helping them create models used to develop new medicines to treat disease. Another program called EteRNA, developed right here at Carnegie Mellon, is another "game with a purpose" that enlists the user to help discover the optimal folding of RNA molecules. 

My own game is meant to be purely educational, with the "proteins" being modeled solely at the lowest level of biological complexity, the primary structure (like beads on a string). It uses the same puzzle styled approach as the previous two, but instead of collecting data for the good of science, the idea is to teach anyone (regardless of background biology knowledge) how different amino acids interact with one another, because those basic interactions (hydrogen bonds, disulfide bridge, et. cetera) are what govern the folding of all proteins in every living being on earth. The project is also similar to PyMOL, a software (developed partly in Python) designed to allow users to visualize high-level structures of complicated proteins. However, this software is tailored primarily towards those with a fair deal of experience in biology, as it is difficult to use otherwise. Hence, my game is a combination of both of these types, aiming to teach anyone at all who plays the game the basics of protein folding, all the while never once touching a textbook.

Structural Plan:

The great thing about biology is, just like with programming, the "features that work" are always conserved and reused elsewhere. Every protein in existence is made completely from a combination of twenty amino acids, each of which is identical to each other in every way except for the sidechain attached to it. These sidechains alone are the only difference between the amino acids, and the sequence they are in is responsible for the structure of the protein. 

As such, this paradigm fits neatly into an inheritance hierarchy. A superclass AminoAcid will be subclassed by each of the amino acids (Phenyalanine, Tyrosine, etc). Each amino acid will continue objects representing functional group, including the Alpha Carbon, Amine group, Carboxyl Group, and the unique sidechain, all of which will be subclasses of the FunctionalGroup class, which specifies its charge, interactivity, et.cetera. A fair bit of the details within this hierarchy will be "hardcoded", such as the information about each particular functional group, but this is simply the real information of the biological and chemical world which will never change in the foreseeable future.


Algorithmic Plan: 

The trickiest part of my project, without a doubt, will be developing the algorthim to autosolve the folding of the protein. The attributes of the amino acids themselves will be contained within the inheritance hierarchy, and the graphical representations of these objects will be displayed in the interface by pygame, but the actual acting on the objects (while simply in 2D) could be challenging, because the computer has to take into account the interactions between many different objects at the same time. I.e., A will moves towards B because of rule X, but will also move towards C because of rule Y, and additionally will tend away from D because of rule Z. This is easy to check if it the user making a definitive move (A moved next to B, they do not interact so undo the move), but is difficult when it is the computer that must make the necessary steps. So far, although only a small part of my project is written syntactically, most of it has been figured out algorithmically. As for the autosolve feature, I am considering using a backtracking algorithms to make moves to solve the puzzle (using the current location of each object as a initialState), storing the solution in a data structure of "moves", and have the graphical interface interpret these moves in the main loop of pygame to interact with the objects, moving the amino acids one by one into the correct configuration in accordance with the stored moves. There could also be an option where the autosolver does not proceed move by move but rather moves everything at once into the correct spot to save time. Theoretically, the graphical interface could even show some of the steps the algorithm is taking to try and solve the puzzle (of course, not all of them can be displayed because of the sheer volume of permutations possible). Since there are thousands of possible moves if we consider legal moves to be into all possible pixels on the screen, so I will need to determine some way of limiting the legal moves (such that there is no overlaps, the chain does not stretch/break, and more). The solution can be updated upon pressing the autosolve button, so the user can press this button at any point 
